Okay, the tape is now on, so I'll start out by asking you a little bit about your background
and what in it might have led you to write science fiction.
Oh, well now you've asked a double barrel question there.
Answer away.
The second part derives out of the first, and maybe there's no connection in background
in what led me to write science fiction.
In the first place, my big brother, Billy, I got to diverge a little bit here.
That's fine.
Have you read anything I've written?
I've read everything you've written.
Good God, I don't think I've done that myself.
But all right, my big brother is involved in various of my stories.
The one which, the most recent, is the little paperback novel, The Catalyst.
And he is one of the principal characters in there, although he is dead.
And he comes back in a very spectacular way as a result of an incredible chemical experiment.
Anyhow, my big brother, Billy, that was our family name for him.
His real name was Blanford Brian Hornets.
And he was my idol.
And he got all the amazing story magazines.
He got Weird Tales from the drug store, which I guess they don't publish anymore, but back
in the middle 20s they did.
And Weird Tales had the original stories by Lovecraft.
And I forget the name of the guy that writes Conan, but they had some of his short stories in it too.
And anyhow, he got me interested in it.
I would borrow his copies surreptitiously and read them.
And also, he had a few of the Edgar Rice Burr's books, the Mars books, the first couple of Tarzan books, and so on.
And these were remarkable things.
I think A Princess of Mars is one of the best adventure stories ever written.
And I've read it many times trying to analyze how Burr has made certain of his points.
It's beautifully pace, suspenseful.
It develops instant sympathy with the characters and so on.
Anyhow, that was a good one, and I read that.
So I had read what there was to offer.
Well, there were other stories too.
In Argos, some of the Edgar Rice Burr's stories were published as serials, like The Chestnut of Mars and other things by Burrosen by other people too.
And my brother Billy also had H.G. Wells' books, The Time Machine, and I think it was called 30 Strange Stories.
He had the Charles Fort books, Low and Book of the Damned, and so on.
So I picked up a smattering of the stuff, and it was very exciting.
And it was just a pleasure to read.
I will mention here right away that one of my big disappointments in life was my trip to the Fort Worth Public Library.
This is when I was 10 or 12 years old.
See if I could find some of the books of Edgar Rice Burr's, and nobody there had ever heard of him.
So, well, I knew then that the world was divided into two kinds of people.
And I might never meet friends of Edgar Rice Burr's, or of Tarzan, or of John Carter, or Dejah Thoris in the Fort Worth Public Library.
But I got other things there.
Anyhow, that was the background.
And my brother Billy was several years older than I. In fact, he was nine years older than I.
And he died when I was just about to graduate from high school.
And he had tumors of the brain, which in those days were inoperable.
Today they don't.
It wouldn't be too much trouble to operate if they couldn't do it then.
Well, I have remembered him, and I had never let him go.
And he has been in several of my stories.
The Ring of Wretcher and the Old, I don't know whether you've ever heard of that or not.
Oh, yes.
Anyhow, he was the brother who was destroyed by the chief bad guy.
But his brain was retained.
He was the poet.
His name was Omer, which of course is taken from Hammer, which is great for blind men.
Anyhow, the two brothers were united at the end of the story.
So that was sort of an idealized fantasy.
Well, I had never written anything at all.
I was working in Washington as a mineral economist during the war.
I'm going to law school, and my daughter was born in 1946,
and there were some bills to be paid, and we needed the money.
So I sat down and wrote my first science fiction story, which was Time Trap.
And this was bought by what was then a standing.
And I thought, well, gee, do they pay money for this stuff?
So I thought perhaps I should turn after more of it, which I did.
So I wrote for a while until my daughter got old enough to demand more and more of my time.
So the writing had to come to an end.
And it didn't really resume again until she was ready to go off to college.
This was in 1964, and I picked it up again.
And I've been writing ever since.
That restart, as you might say.
So that's the background of it.
And I'm retired now, and I retired at the beginning of last year, January 4, 1982.
The last day at work, when I've been writing a little bit off and on since then.
And I have a few items out floating around with Scott Meredith, who is my agent at the moment.
And here I am.
May I call you, Bill?
Please do.
Okay, I'm Charlie.
Thank you.
Bill, I've been talking and talking and talking, and you've asked only one and a half questions.
So the ratio of talk to questions is really getting out of hand.
So try another question.
Okay.
What I want to do now is ask you some specific questions about your works and kind of see how they evolved.
You wrote Time Trap, which was a story, and it had the time loops and the gradual awakening of a Superman, that sort of thing.
And these elements were common in your later work.
Were those themes something you picked up unconsciously, or was this something you were striving for in your work?
Well, it must have been unconscious.
This has been pointed out, or some conscious.
I don't know which is your artwork.
This has been pointed out to me before.
It's perhaps a mystical striving, and I don't know where it comes from.
I did, or maybe you must have known, I did go to a ministerial school at TCU at one time.
This was long, long ago.
And they threw me out for reasons I won't go into here.
But it was a wise decision.
But I've never lost a mystic plant to pop things.
And not all of my stories have this supernatural information.
Some are quite logical and down to earth.
Some do, some don't.
Have you read the nation court?
Yes, I have.
Well, now that is down to earth as you can get.
It has nothing.
Well, maybe, I don't know, maybe it has the computer.
Yeah, he's not straight, dialectic materialism.
Well, who knows?
I don't have a good answer to your question.
No, that's fine.
If the fact that it isn't, and just as an aside, not part of the interview,
I think it's that mystical quality in your work which really appeals to me,
because later on when we get into the rose, that's where I really can go.
But first I want to bring up Flight Into Yesteryear, which was a novel.
How did you decide to, I mean, you tackled a short story and now,
suddenly you wrote a novel.
Was that a pretty big decision to write a novel?
Yeah, I needed a lot of money in a hurry.
We had, I had finished law school past the DC bar,
and got my first job as a patent attorney with American Sign Amid Company in Sanford, Connecticut.
And housing was short.
We were renting a little house up in Connecticut.
And we were going to get evicted, it turned out.
The lady wanted to sell her house, and we were looking around, we were desperate for a house.
And it seemed to me the best way to scrape up the down payment for a house or else
kept get the money for it to rent one that I could afford would be the right novel.
So one thing led to another, and I sat down in just about two months of weekend work.
You call it Flight Into Yesteryear, I'll get to that in a minute.
That's not the right title.
But anyhow, I wrote it very quickly, typed it up, got it over to Wander Stories,
which is it was in combination with Starling Stories, which was edited by Sam Mervin.
And this was, let me see what year it is, 40, 48, yes, 1948, about October 1, 1948.
And a week later he sent a check in the mail.
Now originally it was 45,000 words, which is the length they wanted for a novel in one of their magazines.
And then later on it was expanded into a book.
The original title, Bill, was nothing you've ever heard.
It was Toyn B22.
Toyn B22, after the ship?
Yes. You have heard of course of the historian Arnold Toyn B.
Yes.
And his 21 civilizations, of which the western I think is either the 20th or the 21st.
And what's the next one after that?
He doesn't say, but it would logically have to be the 22nd.
So we're talking here about the next civilization, or fall of civilization, following the 21st, the Toyn B. 21st civilization.
So I call the little novel Toyn B22.
Mervin went through the roof.
He said, nobody will understand Toyn B22.
Whose Toyn B?
I renamed it to be Flight in the Yesterday.
Of course that does wrap up the time traveling backwards angle.
When it came out as a pocketbook later on, I believe the Walheims of Ace changed it to paradox men.
With an explanation in the fly leave of why everybody was a paradox because he could never do what he wanted to or something.
Which is okay.
It was a teasing type of title and I guess it stayed paradox men from then on out.
So that's how it got the title.
Now, what else about it?
Okay, you apparently dashed this off in a couple of months and yet the characters which really make the book are deeply drawn and they're alive and they're smart and they're not really cardboard characters like so many of the science fiction characters of that era were.
Where did you get this knack for developing the characters as you do?
Well, I lie a lot, Bill.
I can see these guys and I can project them.
And I make up stories and here they are acting characters and I can see their faces and the glints in their eyes and the curl, the sneery curl of their lips.
If they're bad guys or they're sharp and take a breath and the hero sees the disaster looming.
Actually, a lot, a lot of people, there's no big deal.
But thank you for the compliment.
Nobody's ever told me that they were other than cardboard characters.
No, they definitely are.
Okay, now this is where I have to get reverent because the Rose came out and the Rose as far as I'm concerned is the best science fiction book that's ever written.
First thing I got to ask you about it is why did it appear, why was it first published in this obscure British magazine authentic?
How did it ever end up there?
Well, that's easy because nobody here would buy it.
My agent at the time, Forest Aquaman of, I think, Los Angeles, fattled it around here and there.
Nobody in this country would buy it.
It went to John Camel and he wrote a nice two-line letter package.
He just couldn't use it.
It wasn't the kind of thing that any science fiction magazine or fantasy and science fiction magazine was publishing at the time.
And I should have known better for writing it.
But I wanted to write it, so I did.
And finally Aquaman sold it to this little authentic magazine in England and they published it.
And then after that it began to get some circulation.
Michael Murcock picked it up for compact books.
That's a schedule, I think, something like that.
Anyhow, they put out a little paperback.
Then in England they came out in a couple of hardcover editions.
And then in this country, Berkeley, it may still be in front of Berkeley.
That's a little royalty check just last year.
So it didn't come out here first because its time had not arrived.
You had written before for money because you needed the money.
And you wrote this when you said because you wanted to write it.
What was it about this book that you wanted to write?
Well, really, Jacques, again, resembles my brother a great deal.
And if you can visualize that guy with his sarcasm, his biting wit, his contempt for all the...
Well, I don't know, but he had a high personal integrity and a impatience with convention and so on.
At least in his head he did.
And I wanted to get him into print.
And of course Anna van Thou is me, although I had to take on a female form to make it effective.
At one time I would have been pleased to die if it would bring him back.
But of course that was just being said.
But it was a thought and it was a psychic force driving the story.
You talked at length in this book about the enmity between science and art.
Is that something that you feel exists or has existed before?
Oh, I suppose so. It's not a big thing to know.
There is always a question.
What take a university?
They have a budget. Does it go into the physics department?
Your department? The chemistry department?
Or will they establish a chair part?
Or teaching the Renaissance in Italy?
Or the old masters, the painters?
Or they have a music school?
Or where does it get divided up?
There is a conflict.
At the time I wrote that I think there was a bigger conflict than there is now.
I think science was one at least, temporarily.
Thirty years ago it wasn't at all clear. That was not too clear.
The ending of that book was very moving.
It was not a tear-jerker. It was very realistically portrayed.
Did you have that ending, I'm curious, in mind when you wrote it?
Or did that just develop and that's how it turned out?
It just developed. That was one of the stories where I didn't know how it was going to come out.
In fact, I worked on that one for two years.
This is not a two-month plot.
I read all the books on the arts in the Stanford Public Library.
This is one year. I took notes on them for my entire two weeks vacation one year.
Then it gradually began to come together.
I used, of course, as you'd seen in the story, Oscar Wilde's story of the nightingale in the rose.
Which I'd read many years before and I was quite impressed by.
The ending, though, I worked on that one.
At one time it had other endings.
But I can't remember what they were. This is the best ending, I think.
Oh, yeah. Again, it had that element of this transcendental experience,
which kind of would, one, to suspect there might be a race of supermen that we're going to be forming.
Well, that was the idea.
With this power that he had, he was then be able to do all kinds of wonderful things.
And it was given to him by a late after the ride up and in.
The British critics, Arthur C. Clarke and Judith Merrill, Michael Morkot, Brian Oldis, really liked the rose.
And yet it seemed that it was another decade or so before it ever caught on over here.
Do you have any pet theories on why in England it was a success, but not one over here particularly at first?
Well, I think this is due to the efforts of Michael Morkot.
He launched it over there and then it was picked up over here.
Let me give you a little bit more history on this.
There was a time when the rose was in a longer form and it had the name not the rose, but invitation.
It was an intergalactic thing where the earth was being examined to see whether it would be admitted into a galactic relevant.
And it didn't have the ending that it now has.
Damon Knight liked that, but he couldn't get his publishers to accept it.
This again was a year or so before it came out and it's inauthentic and it's short form, which tells me.
So at that point I said maybe I'm going to shorten this thing down and give it a different ending.
So I did.
I cut it from 45,000 words down to I think it's about 30,000.
And it, Ackerman then was able to sell it to Arpennick in England.
And then it began to pick up Arthur Clark saw it, Patrick Morkot saw it.
And Morkot was getting into the editorial business over the last, last time.
Asked to have this people, Compact Books, publish it.
And we have a contract for this and they did publish it.
Then it was picked up fairly quickly by two other British outfits in hardcover form.
And of course they had to pad it out with the two other stories to make it in a book size.
And Damon Knight then picked it up from the British.
He said, Hey, here's the thing I've been thinking about all these many years and that's come out in Britain.
Why didn't you give it to me?
So okay.
So Berkeley the right, the US right.
And that's why all the timeline.
It hadn't been for Morkot.
It would never have gone anywhere there or here.
It was interesting though that it was, it appeared in England and then it was 13 years later that it,
that Berkeley finally put it out as a heart as the paperback and that's the only American printing.
It came out, let's see, 1953, I believe in authentic.
Then about another 10 years in pocket book form, a paperback and another couple of years over here.
Yeah.
Well, a prophet is not without honor, save in his own country.
It's not the first to say that.
That's, that's, my theory on it was always that the new wave started in England and maybe they were more attuned to the kind of writing.
Got a point there.
They, they could live with something like this.
Whereas over here, everybody was guided pretty much by the Dean of Science Fiction, John Camel.
And he was a hardware man and everything had to obey the laws of physics or it would be unacceptable.
But I've written many good things for him and I'm grateful to him.
He bought my first story so I can't complain about John Camel.
Great guy.
Now the invitation has never been published as such, right?
Correct.
Good because I couldn't say I'd read everything if it had.
Well, okay.
One or two other little items you haven't read either but they're submerged and not worth dragging you up now.
Well, if you're, I'll get on to them but if you're talking about Leonard Lockhart or whatever, I read them, the two anyway.
Oh well.
That was a collaborative effort, you know.
I guess this would be a good time as any to ask about the Leonard Lockhart stories.
Was it Ted Thomas who was it?
Yeah.
Okay.
Ted and I, we were in the patent department at Sinomid together.
I wrote the first Leonard Lockhart story, improbable profession.
And at that time he was writing science articles for the Stanford Advocate as well as being on the patent, in the patent department at Sinomid.
So I said to him, why don't you and I start this series of stories about a patent attorney and his problems?
Here's the first one.
So he said, yeah, we can do that.
So I wrote the first one, he wrote the second one.
No, together we wrote the second one.
That was half and half.
And after that, I left Sinomid and went to Grace and he continued the series.
So number three is an all subsequent story or it is even though the name Leonard Lockhart is still used on them.
Okay, that'll be a good bridge to the question after this one.
But this question is in 1953 then we saw two short stories, Child Bacronus and the chess players.
And then you disappeared for 13 years.
How did you, what happened?
You wrote for this five years pretty intensively and then Zab you're gone for a while.
How did you decide to do that?
Well, as I mentioned, Bill, my little girl was growing up and at that time I was writing up in the attic of the house I was running and later on one of that box.
And she would stand down in the hallway and cry.
She wanted me to come down and play with her, which I did.
And I put my writing aside and I said, well, first things first, let's bring up this little girl, raise her right, give her some attention.
And if there's time left over to write, I might do some writing.
But there was never any time left over.
And I got out of the habit altogether until she went off to college.
And I thought, gee, I'm going to need some tuition money here, so I better get back with this one.
Which I did.
So it was money again that made you start up?
Yeah.
Okay, when you, I'm sorry, go ahead.
I'm not sure right now whether I'm doing it for money or just to see if I can still do it.
I'm curious as to whether I've lost the touch and maybe this year I will find out.
Anyhow, right now I'm not doing it for money, although the money would be nice.
So there are motives for you. Why do people write?
Go ahead, you had a question.
Okay, in 1966 then, or approximately then, whenever you did start up, all of a sudden we're seeing a different kind of story, the lawyer stories.
And I've got an ornament to his profession and the alchemist, which were kind of related because they were both at the same chemical company.
And then the millionaire patent and probable cause, but they're all law stories.
So I've already asked you why you started writing. That was my first question.
And why did you switch to this kind of story, which was so different from the other stuff except for the Leonard Lockhart stories?
Well, I thought maybe I should use something, and use something of that.
This is my field, my professional field, patent work and law.
And goodness knows there's plenty of drama in it, so I thought maybe I should use some of this local history as background.
And of course that showed up profoundly in the catalyst and later on in the Venetian court.
So it's something I know and I thought I would try it out.
But then you wrote these stories, but then you kept it off with the Ring of Riternal, which was kind of a throwback to the old style.
Well, let me, yeah, okay. That was kind of a throwback. That was an intermediate thing.
I can't explain the anomaly there, Bill.
Well, it was a wonderful anomaly if it was an anomaly. If it wasn't an anomaly, it was a good one.
Well, thank you.
The interesting thing, the mystical part here to me was you had the two different religions vying for each other.
One of them essentially saying that blind chance rules the universe and the other one saying that it's essentially that it's guided by something in it.
It seemed to me that you ended up by kind of siding with the latter that there is something guiding the cosmos.
And that one, that was a really philosophical book.
And the thing there too, the Invasion, the Deep, where was it Homer that stayed there for 18 years in the Deep?
And that, I'd seen evidence of that earlier, this kind of blind space where the protagonist goes and is disembodied and then comes back.
Does that have any special meaning to you or is that out of your subconscious?
It isn't Homer that went into the Deep. He was the brother whose brain was extra.
Okay, right. I'm getting it.
James Andrew.
Yeah, I'm getting it mixed up.
But, okay, I'm sorry, I interrupted you.
Oh, no, we might as well get it right here.
Yeah, the Deep, where did that come up?
Because I'd seen evidence for that before in some of the earlier stories from the decade earlier.
I thought that would be a very impressive concept of some all-encompassing milieu, as it were, where only the consciousness can exist.
And this is the use that I put it to.
But beyond that, Bill, I just can't really remember.
The concept of a mind wandering in the Deep does go away way back.
And I had it many years before that. I just didn't have a chance to use it.
Okay, you've done a lot of homework on this novel, too, as far as you used the steady state cosmology theory so that the universe is continually being...
...made up again and being recreated.
Yeah, well, of course, that's one of the standard theories. I think that's gradually yielding now, though.
Right, but it made it interesting. It allows you to have this rebirth, though, which you tend to do, the transcendental rebirth.
And it fit really nicely with steady state cosmology.
Yeah.
But on that very point, I don't know whether you've read Firebird.
Oh, yes.
Now, that one starts out with a big bang and expands and then stops and contracts.
So we have an oscillation, and there are an infinite number of big bangs.
Because when it contracts, it goes back into the original farm hall, and it blows up and expands again.
So that's another theory. That's the apotheosis of the big bang theory.
Yeah, it's the big bang with the closed universe option, where you...
...enough mass to make it oscillate. Yeah.
Okay, you wrote The Ring of Riternal, and then...that was 1968.
Then you disappeared for another six years until the arachnid window came out.
What caused this interlude, if I may ask?
Oh, let me think there. See, did I stop? I can't recall. I must have stopped.
At least you didn't appear in print for six years.
I'm trying to think. Oh, my daughter graduated. She graduated in 1968.
And the heat was off real wrong, and I had to get back on with my son.
He started again in 1972, and it continued for quite a while.
But I just didn't realize there was that gap. Maybe I was just goofing off.
Well, we missed you.
The arachnid window, when you did get back in again, I really enjoyed that story, and it has the time loop.
But I think the thing I enjoyed about that story more than anything was the professor,
who was obviously in the twilight of his career, kind of looking back and wondering if it was all worth it, and that sort of thing.
I liked his point of view.
Well, I'm glad you liked it.
About that time, I realized I was someday soon going to have to retire from grace, so I put myself in it a little bit.
Again, it was a mishmash.
It uses a number of things that were, well, each incident probably has some counterpart and some previous science fiction story.
Time travel, of course, is one of the most tattended things possible.
But time survival, which is what happened here, might be a little different.
And some of the technology there is purely invented.
Okay, all of a sudden, you had four novels that came out, bang, bang, bang, bang.
And Roofhead was the first one, and it was quite different from anything to me anyway than anything you'd written before.
How long had you thought about it? How did it come up?
Oh, I consider that one sort of a pot boiler, Bill.
I started out writing it. I thought I would do a thing which is round upon.
You're not supposed to write post-atomic novels.
They're really unacceptable.
But here seem to be a good one.
And I hope you're not a pro-Nixon fan.
No, not at all.
Well, I thought, gee, here's this guy. He's about to take over the country.
Anything he does is okay just because he says so.
And I'm going to have a character like that in Roofhead.
So I put him in there.
He was the president of the underworld, and he would come out and rule the upper world, except he didn't.
B. Wolk was modeled at the time on an Alaskan Husky dog that lived next door to us.
And she and I were great friends, so I thought I'd put her in it.
And one thing led to another, and it all seemed to come together.
And of course you've got to have telepathy and a thing like that.
There were certain novel aspects of it, the whole like absorbing the energy of the potential earthquake
into a gigantic spinning sphere, and that in turn generating the power to create a vortex in those that have the power.
So there were some novel features, and it's one of my happier efforts.
It's not really serious.
Well, some of it is.
You know, at one time it had a different ending.
And I have to cough when I think about it.
Excuse me while I cough.
This is a psychological cough.
In the original ending, the girl lived, but I got involved in some chemical litigation.
So that's, I lost.
And I was so angry and so disappointed, I said, somebody has to die.
So I killed the heroine and wrote some poetry for her benefit so she wouldn't feel too badly about it.
And that's the poetry of course is in the front and in the back.
So that's a little sidelight on that.
I never would have guessed that.
You thought everything came out logically.
Our personal lives control a lot of what we do.
I've got, what I'd have, I have about five more questions, but I have to flip my tape in a minute.
When I want to, you mentioned the device, the novelty in that, and I meant to mention earlier the device in The Paradox Men or
Flight of the Yeshio, however you want to call it, about the body's shield, which bullets would not appear,
but low momentum projectiles would with the swords.
And I really have always liked that device as a novelty in science fiction.
Well, I needed something like that to get in some sword play.
Why would you want to have sword play when you can just pull out a pistol and shoot a guy in the gut?
Well, the only way you can do it is if a pistol doesn't work.
So then you've got to have something that goes in a little slower and can skewer him properly.
And therefore you will need some kind of shield such as that.
So that's the way I figured it anyhow.
Okay, I'm glad I had remembered to ask that question here.
Tell you, let me change my tape. It'll take about two minutes and I only have about five more questions if you can hang in there.
Yeah, go ahead.
Okay, thank you. If you want to take a break or something, just put the phone down and we'll holler at you.
Put the phone down, get a drink of water and come back and wait for your...
Sounds good. Okay.